docs(filters): add ux docs (#193)
siemens/element: docs/patterns/filter.md

# Filter

Filters allow users to refine the displayed information based on specific
attributes of their choice.

## Usage ---

Filter parameters and functionality are highly dependent on a particular use
case. The following proposals should serve as an introductory guide.

In terms of the positioning of filters, and where they should be placed on the
page, we recommend starting with one of the three options below. The decision
depends on the context and scalability needs.

![Filter - pattern decision](images/filter-decision-tree.png)

> ### Selection methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filter selection
```

Choose the filter method that makes sense for both the user and the data
presented.

- **Single-select:** Only one attribute can be selected.
  E.g. using [radio buttons](../components/forms-inputs/radio.md) or [select](../components/forms-inputs/select.md).
- **Multi-select:** Multiple attributes can be selected.
  E.g. using [checkboxes](../components/forms-inputs/checkbox.md) or [advance select](../components/forms-inputs/select.md).
- **Range**: Allows selection within a defined numerical or date range.
  E.g. using [slider](../components/forms-inputs/slider.md) or [date range](../components/forms-inputs/date-range-filter.md).

> ### Display methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filter application
```

Author: @timowolf mmm i rather stay with Display methods.

I think “Display methods” is more accurate because it refers to how filtered results are shown and updated, not just the act of applying filters. It also matches the content: Batch vs. Dynamic describe when and how results update based on user input.

"Filter application" sounds more technical and i dont think it reflects the pattern 🤷

**Batch display** lets users set multiple filters before submitting with an
`Apply` button. Use it when users need to make multiple selections across
multiple different categories.

**Dynamic display** updates results immediately upon user selection, removing
the need for an `Apply` button. Use it when immediate feedback or results are
desired after each filter change.

![Filter - display method](images/filter-batch-dynamic.png)

> ### Applied filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Applied filter visualization
```

Use the [filter bar](../components/sorting-filtering/filter-bar.md)
to display the specific filters that are applied. This is an optional feature,
intended for situations where the current filter selection is not easily visible
elsewhere.

To indicate the total count of active filters,
[badges](../components/status-notifications/badges.md).

### Best practices for filters

- Always make it clear which filters are active.
- Understand a user’s priorities and consider them in the display order of
  filters.
- If a category has more than *7-10* options, consider ways to group filters or
  use a `Show more` type of functionality.
- If there are many filter options, consider adding a search functionality
  within the filter itself. For multiple filter categories, either add a search
  input for each one or provide a global search input.
- Applied filters should be easy to remove.
- Provide clear and descriptive labels for filters.
- Use common UX writing forms for filter interactions like `Reset filters`,
  `Select all`, `Deselect all`, and `Apply`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use progress indication when updating the data set according to filter application takes longer.

```

What is our interaction time for progress? 0.8 sec

Reviewer: Perfect now.

- **Range**: Allows selection within a defined numerical or date range.
  E.g. using [slider](../components/forms-inputs/slider.md) or [date range](../components/forms-inputs/date-range-filter.md).

### Apply filters

**Batch display** lets users set multiple filters before submitting with an
`Apply` button. Use it when users need to make multiple selections across
multiple different categories.

**Dynamic display** updates results immediately upon user selection, removing
the need for an `Apply` button. Use it when immediate feedback or results are
desired after each filter change.

![Filter - display method](images/filter-batch-dynamic.png)

### Applied filter visualization

Use the [filter bar](../components/sorting-filtering/filter-bar.md)
to display the specific filters that are applied. This is an optional feature,
intended for situations where the current filter selection is not easily visible
elsewhere.

To indicate the total count of active filters,
[badges](../components/status-notifications/badges.md).

### Best practices for filters

- Always make it clear which filters are active.

> - Understand a user’s priorities and consider them in the display order of
>   filters.
> - If a category has more than *7-10* options, consider ways to group filters or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Organize filters by understanding and aligning with user priorities.
- If a category has more than *7-10* options, consider ways to group filters or
```
